Peripheral astrocyte processes as key players in specialized astrocyte–neuron interactions Heterogeneity in adult astrocytes exists at many levels, including the morphological, transcriptomic/proteomic, physiological and functional. A significant proportion of heterogeneity may exist in the peripheral processes – as illustrated using specific examples discussed in the main text. Based on the hypothesis that astrocyte identity is highly plastic and is shaped by interactions with an ‘instructive neuronal scaffold’, specialization of peripheral processes, which mediate astrocyte–neuron interactions, seems logical and would allow astrocytes to respond quickly to changes in local synaptic activity. (A) Morphology – (A’) Schematic outlining basic astrocyte structure, which consists of a central soma and four to ten primary branches, which in turn branch off creating many higher order branchlets and terminal leaflets: (A’’) At the ultrastructural level, peripheral processes are comprised of both expanded and constricted segments, and often end with a constricted tip. Classically, astrocyte processes are thought to enwrap synapses at the process tip, forming a tripartite structure. However, astrocytes and synapses can also interact en passant, usually on so-called process expansions. Clusters of synapses tend to form at these structures, which are often characterized by the accumulation of mitochondria. (B) Transcriptome/Proteome – Translation of mRNAs by ribosomes (red structures) in processes will change the local proteome. Changes in protein distribution may also affect function. Local recycling of the glutamate transporter GLT1 (blue) will affect cell surface levels: Increased lateral mobility, due to the release of GLT1 from synaptically located protein scaffolds (triggered by calcineurin activity +), will control cell surface distribution. (C) Physiology – Intracellular Ca2+ increases are thought to occur through a variety of mechanisms: GPCR, G-protein coupled receptor; IP3R2, Type 2 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor; MCU, Mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter; (m)NCX, (Mitochondrial) Na+/Ca2+ exchanger; mPTP, Mitochondrial permeability transition pore; PMCA, Plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase; SERCA, Sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase. (D) Function – Heterogeneity may underlie differential synapse formation and function through various cell–cell interactions (mediated by membrane proteins or secreted factors): α2δ-1,Voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit α2δ-1; NLs, Neuroligins; NRCAM, Neuronal cell adhesion molecule; NRXs, Neurexins; TGF-β1, Transforming growth factor-β1; TSP, Thrombospondin. (A) and (C) are modified from [11]; (D) is modified from [114].